1--
It is difficult to know where to start. I was really looking forward to this book, and it was an enormous bummer.There were so many &#34; how the heck did we get here&#34; moments. The story lurches from one event to the next. I Kept feeling like I had missed some huge important part of the story. Tobias/Four seemed to have some sort of major personality meltdown. He was an entirely different character. I expected that there would be some maturation of Tobias and Tris in this third book, but they seemed to have regressed instead. Their relationships to the new characters had no forethought, no logic.The alternating point of view between Tris and Tobias was confusing. They had the same voice. I kept having to stop and try to remember who was talking. After a while I gave up trying.As for the ending... Yes, it was unexpected, and heartbreaking,. Beyond that, it did not make any sense to the plot of the entire series. The way Tobias' emotional reaction was handled through all those sort little chapters was...well... stupid (I really tried to find a different word.) Those were not chapters. Did Veronica Roth have a chapter quota to meet?I can picture this story being rewritten into two separate volumes with the missing plot and character development fleshed out properly. I would not read them though unless the ending was changed to fit the plot progression from the previous books, and to show maturation of the characters.

2--
I was really looking forward to this book, I pre-ordered it all the way back in May, but it was really not on par with the other two.  Like other reviewers have said, the dual POV was poorly done.  I couldn't tell which character was speaking and about halfway through I decided I didn't care anymore.  The revelation about what the divergent actually are was kind of a let down.  The factions being a form of behavior modification was not explained well and didn't make sense to me.  It was a weak explanation of how the world of factions that existed in the first two books could come to be.  And most of all I don't think killing Tris was necessary or a good idea.  I think the situation in reverse would have been better.  The plan being for Tris to go in and set off the memory serum becuase she had a chance of survival and then at the last minute Caleb stepping in and sacrificing himself.  We already knew Tris would sacrifice herself for others, she did it several times in the previous books.  It also might have shown that the GDs weren't so damaged after all.The book was bad enough and the ending shocking enough that I actually wondered if the author did it on purpose.  A lot of people are saying that they won't go watch the movie now, and I'm wondering if that was the point.

3--
Allegiant made me regret reading this entire series. I read the post the author did explaining why the story went the way it did - I still wish I could 'unread' it, but it's her story to tell.  My opinion is that it could have went quite a few different ways, and still maintained the integrity of the characters, as well as, the message she was trying to send...but I'm just a reader...and as a reader - of a trilogy, no less - I regret the time & money I put in to this story.

4--
Wow. I read the first two books and was greatly looking forward to the third. This book is T.E.R.R.I.B.L.E. Slow....Yes. Plodding....Yes. Boring....Yea. Wow what a terribly written ending to an otherwise quality series!

5--
I would like to request a do over.  Please!  I am not a picky reader and not a technical one either, but this book just didn't fit.  As a reader, I feel the author let us down.  Why get us invested in these characters and then make it so easy for us not to even care about them or even feel like they are the same people as they were in the first two.  Character's chapters read the same.  Should have kept it from Tris's point if view.  Would not have even known who's was who's if it weren't for the their names.  Epic fail in my opinion.  Wouldn't recommend this trilogy now to anyone.  Waste of time.  Sorry Mrs. Roth, but you botched this one.

6--
I have never been so angry with how a book/series ends. The ending is horrible! Though the rest of the book isn't too great either. Books 1 and 2 were fantastic. This was entirely different. When an author writes from 2 points of view, the points of view need to sound different, they don't. Four becomes much weaker than you are shown in the first 2 books. He becomes a bit too much like Tris. I could go on and on about how many times this book acts like it is going somewhere awesome but then doesn't. Between all the climaxes that lead to nothing and the horrible ending, this book isn't worth the read. Stick to the first 2 and enjoy them, don't let this book ruin the series for you.

7--
I read Divergent this summer and then finished Insurgent last week. Thought both were good, possibly great, depending on this vital, third book.Oh boy.I'm not going to go into spoilers, but I will say that the only reason I'm giving this book two stars instead of one is because I'll give the author some props for having the guts to do the ending she wanted to do.The only problem is that the ending didn't really fit with the characters she had portrayed the rest of the series. Tris and Four had been set up to be unique characters, but then when Roth uses both as first-person POV in this book instead of just Tris, it weakens the characters instead of strengthening them. In a way, she painted herself into a corner by going first-person in Divergent instead of third person, but it didn't work in this book.There were plot holes. It seems as though ANY authority figure is automatically corrupt, but most can change their ways with a simple speech. Every guard is pathetic and can't watch the person they are supposed to guard. Tris becomes an infallible source of information (far different than in Insurgent) and Four becomes weak and fragile.By the time I was halfway through, I was trudging through, just plodding along to finish and the ending just confirmed the rating for me.

8--
I loved the first two books in this trilogy...enjoyed rereading them in preparation for Allegiant.  Calling this book a disappointment is a gross understatement.  Did Roth really write this book?  Where were her editors?  Tris and Tobias were barely recognizable as the characters I met and loved in Divergent and Insurgent.  Action(for a 549 page book) was scarce.  Tris' and Tobias' attraction to each other and their relationship was like a sidebar without the passion and urgency of the other books.  Roth portrayed Tobias as a whiney little kid...where did that come from, for heaven's sake???  The explanations for the "experiments" seemed contrived with lots of loopholes.  The plot seemed rushed, even though it was a very long book."SPOILER ALERT"  DO NOT READ FURTHER IF YOU HAVE NOT READ THE BOOK.How could Roth kill off Tris?  It made no sense except that she did it for shock value.  Her loyal readers deserved better than this.  Now,I can't reread the series because I know Tris dies. I was looking forward to the movies, but I will not go to see them now.  Yes, I know that the author can do whatever she likes with her characters, but I can certainly choose not to read her books. She killed off several favorite characters, wasn't that enough.  I am so disappointed.  I enjoy reading good books several times and now I won't with this series, nor will I read anything else written by Veronica Roth.  She deals with betrayals in her books and I feel like she betrayed her readers.

9--
For me, it's just not worth it to read something that's going to leave me sad and depressed. I loved the first two books, but I sort of wish I hadn't invested in those only to be saddened so much with this one. I just don't like to leave a story feeling worse than when I started it, that's just me.

10--
I loved the first novel of this series and was reasonably happy with the second. But the third just doesn't work. ***Spoilers in case there is anybody who doesn't already know the ending***Whether she intended to do so or not, the author raises certain expectations in her readers when she creates a strong romance plot. Likewise when she writes most of a series in the first person heroine's point of view -- i.e., you can't tell your story if you're dead. Switching to a dual POV in the final book is a giveaway that either Tris or Tobias isn't going to survive, but unfortunately the dual perspectives don't ring true, since the two voices are too similar.Killing the heroine/hero of any novel is a huge risk, and it really only works when the readers are expecting a tragic ending. In a series like this one, we expect triumph at the end, not to mention a happy resolution for the primary romance. But when the trilogy can be summed up with "your mom dies, your dad dies, your friends die, then you die" there's not much to celebrate or feel good about. The world sucks and then you die. I read books to escape that unhappy reality!

